JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Investigators conclude a
Russian-made missile took down
the Malaysia
Airlines flight over
Ukraine last year.
Then: Democrats running for
president get their first crack
at the debate stage tonight.
Plus, our series called Congo's
hope continues, with a look at
how cinema can help heal the
wounds of war.
CHERIE RIVERS NDALIKO, Executive
Director, Yole!Africa: It's
incredible to see what happens
when they learn that they can
tell their own story, and in
their version of the story,
they can be the hero.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the last of
the president's men. I talk with
Bob Woodward and Alexander
Butterfield about the new book
that reveals new dimensions of
Richard Nixon's personality
and his obsession with secrecy.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Palestinians
proclaimed today a day of rage
after nearly a month of
escalating
violence. Three Israeli
civilians died in a string of
stabbing attacks, along with
three
Palestinians, including two of
the attackers. In response,
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu called an
emergency Cabinet meeting.
There is word that U.S. and
Russian jets flew within miles
of each other over Syria on
Saturday.
The Pentagon reported the
incident today in a video
briefing. Russian airstrikes
have
been hammering targets across
Syria. A U.S. military spokesman
says the close encounter
underscores the risk.
COL. STEVE WARREN, U.S. Army: It
is dangerous, right? I mean,
it's dangerous if two sets
of aircraft come into the same
piece of airspace without very
clear, laid-out protocols for
safety of all involved, which is
why we have sat down with the
Russians to establish some
safety protocols.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, at a
Moscow event, President Vladimir
Putin blamed Washington
for a lack of coordination on
the competing air campaigns.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
We asked the U.S. on the
military
level to give us the targets
which they consider to be the
terrorist ones. But the answer
was,
no, we are not ready to do that.
Then we thought and asked
another question. Could you tell
us where we shouldn't hit?
Again, no answer. So,
what should we do?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The next round of
talks between the U.S. and
Russian militaries will be
tomorrow.
Meanwhile, the Islamic State
called today for Muslims to
launch a holy war against both
countries. The appeal was in an
audio message posted online.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban
announced it's pulling back from
Kunduz, the city in the
north, to avoid further civilian
casualties. Taliban fighters
held Kunduz for three days
last month, and the fierce
fighting forced thousands of
people to flee. Now fighting
has shifted south to Ghazni, a
city that lies along the main
highway between Kabul and
Kandahar.
Iran's Parliament voted today to
approve a nuclear deal with the
U.S. and other world
powers. It came after rowdy
debate and objections from
hard-liners, who argued the deal
concedes
too much to the West. Now the
bill goes to the Guardian
Council of 12 clerics for
ratification.
The stance of Supreme Leader
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei is still
unknown. He has the final
say on all matters of state.
The world's top two beer makers
are joining forces.
Anheuser-Busch InBev sealed a
deal
today to buy SABMiller for $106
billion. In a company video, the
head of A.B. InBev said
it's all about consumer choice.
CARLOS BRITO, CEO,
Anheuser-Busch InBev: Our joint
portfolio of global and local
brands
would provide more choices for
beer drinkers in new and
existing markets around the
world.
Consumers would have more
opportunities to taste a wide
range of beers, ranging from
specialty and craft beers to
local champions and global
flagship brands.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new company
will control about a third of
the global beer market. But
the sheer size of the deal could
run into resistance from
regulators, especially in
the U.S. and China.
And Wall Street had a down day
after China reported that its
imports fell 20 percent
last month over a year ago. The
Dow Jones industrial average
lost 50 points to close
back near 17080. The Nasdaq fell
42 points and the S&P 500
dropped 13.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
digging into the evidence of
what shot down the Malaysian
passenger plane over Ukraine;
how a possible Joe Biden run
could influence tonight's
Democratic
debate; a new book reveals
untold dimensions of President
Nixon's White House, and much
more.
A 15-month-long investigation
into what brought down Malaysia
Airlines Flight 17 last year
is over. And, as most expected,
it concluded a missile targeted
the plane. The airliner
was traveling from Amsterdam to
Kuala Lumpur when it was struck
over Eastern Ukraine. No
one has taken responsibility,
but today's report set sharpened
suspicions and denials.
Like a giant jigsaw puzzle, the
pieced-together wreckage of the
plane's front fuselage loomed
over the chairman of the Dutch
Safety Board, as he announced
the findings:
TJIBBE JOUSTRA, Dutch Safety
Board Chairman: Flight MH17
crashed as a result of the
detonation
of a warhead outside the
airplane, above the left-hand
side of the cockpit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In short, as this
Dutch animation depicts, a
Russian-built missile,
identified
by shrapnel and paint, blew the
Malaysian airliner apart on July
17 last year. The report
says the missile exploded less
than a meter from the cockpit,
spraying metal fragments
into the plane.
All 298 people on board were
killed, as wreckage, luggage and
bodies rained down over Eastern
Ukraine. Investigators say some
passengers might have stayed
alive for a minute or so
after impact, but were too dazed
by shock, cold and loss of
oxygen to know what was
happening.
Barry Sweeney's son was
one of those who died.
BARRY SWEENEY, Father of Victim:
But because of the impact of the
missile, the explosion,
the confusion and everything
else, it sounds as though
everybody died peacefully. And
that's
comforting me, and I would think
all other families of Flight
MH17.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The investigation
also plotted simulated flight
paths and concluded the missile
was launched from a
124-square-mile region.
Russian-backed separatists
controlled that
area, but the report doesn't
address who fired the weapon.
Still, the Russian state arms
producer that makes the BUK
missile disputed those findings.
It said its own experiments
prove a much older missile
took down the plane.
YAN NOVIKOV, General Director,
Almaz-Antey (through
translator): The general
engineer
of missile 9M38 decided that the
safety period for using this
missile, including all
extensions,
is 25 years. The use of these
missiles was prohibited after
that, and they were retired
from the Russian army.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The arms
manufacturer said that kind of
missile is still used by
Ukraine's
military and that, in fact, it
was launched from
Ukrainian-controlled territory.
Either
way, the Dutch investigators
said today the plane never
should have been in that
airspace
to begin with.
TJIBBE JOUSTRA: Ukraine's
position is that there was
insufficient reason for closing
the airspace above the eastern
part of the country. We have,
however, concluded that,
as a precaution, there was
sufficient reason for Ukraine
authorities to close the
airspace
above the eastern part
of their country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, Dutch
prosecutors say unnamed persons
of interest have been
identified in a criminal
investigation that is
continuing.
We look at some of the details
of today's findings with a
longtime investigator. Peter
Goelz is a former managing
director of the U.S. National
Transportation Safety Board.
He oversaw the investigation,
among others, of TWA Flight 800
that crashed off Long Island
almost 20 years ago and
speculation then of whether a
missile brought it down.
Peter Goelz, welcome
back to the program.
How good a job did this
international team do, do you
think, of piecing together what
caused this crash?
PETER GOELZ, Former Managing
Director, National
Transportation Safety Board: I
think they
did an extraordinary job. I read
the report late last night and
this morning. It's almost
300 pages in length. It is
detailed. It is factual. And
it's very sober.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, among other
things, I'm struck by how it
describes pieces of shrapnel
from this missile, paint from
the missile embedded in the
bodies of the crew and people
who were sitting in the front of
the plane. Does it leave any
doubt of the kind of missile
that hit right at the -- what
they said, a meter from the
plane?
PETER GOELZ: Yes, no, there's no
doubt about the type of missile
or where it struck.
I mean, when a missile detonates
in that proximity to the
aircraft, it leaves very
distinctive
marks, as you can see, on the
nose of the aircraft. And these
holes, these hundreds
of holes, they have microscopic
bits of the metal, of the piece
of shrapnel sometimes
in the hole. And you can
trace it back to the source.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we heard the
Dutch investigator call it the
9N314 missile. What does it tell
you, Peter Goelz, that is a
missile that blew up just
outside the plane? It didn't hit
the
plane. It blew up before
it struck the plane.
PETER GOELZ: Now, the more
recent missiles have what they
call proximity fuses. And they
are driven by radar. It senses
when they're in close proximity
to their target and they
explode and dispersing the
shrapnel in a very defined way.
We did tests in 1997 at the
China Lake Missile Center in
which the U.S., we detonated
warheads
near pieces of aircraft skin,
the metal, the aluminum. And we
saw the very distinctive
patterns that they left. So the
investigators knew what they
were looking for and knew what
they had when they found it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is possible to
say one side or another would
have had this kind of missile?
We know the Russians are saying,
no, we don't have this missile
in our arsenal anymore;
the Ukrainians were using this.
PETER GOELZ: Well, I think that
the investigators that I have
spoken to who were involved in
this time-consuming effort have
indicated that there is other
information available
from intelligence sources that
indicate where this missile was
launched from, and that it's
very clear that it was well
inside the separatist territory.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So is it
possible, do you think it will
eventually be possible to say
this
was the source, this is
who fired that missile?
PETER GOELZ: Yes, I think
the truth comes out.
After KAL 007 was shot down off
the Soviet Union, it took years,
and it took years of
activism on the part of family
members, but eventually the
Russians admitted what happened.
I think it will take time, but
the truth will come out in this
case as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And one other
thing, the discussion today
about whether this plane,
passenger
plane should have been flying
over an area of conflict?
PETER GOELZ: That is probably
the most important
recommendation that the Dutch
made. You know,
that day, there had been almost
150 aircraft traveling along
that airway, the same one
that Malaysia...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Passenger planes.
PETER GOELZ: That's right.
These are passengers planes.
And what they said was that
there was very poor coordination
between the civil aviation
authorities and the government,
and the governments at play, and
that they probably shouldn't
have been there in that area of
conflict, because planes at
lower altitudes, mind you,
had been being shot down, that
greater attention has to be paid
to the safety of the airways.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Peter Goelz,
we thank you very much.
PETER GOELZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will hear a
great deal from the five
Democrats vying to be president
tonight,
as they take to the debate stage
for the first time in this
campaign.
But hovering over them are
questions about a potential
sixth candidate, Vice President
Joe Biden.
Some Democrats are getting
impatient and say it's time for
him to decide whether or not
he's going to run.
The "NewsHour"'s political
director, Lisa Desjardins,
reports from Las Vegas on the
Biden factor.
LISA DESJARDINS: The man
not on stage tonight...
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States: I'm Joe
Biden. I'm Jill's husband.
LISA DESJARDINS: ... has had
plenty to stay this month. Going
off script at a Hispanic
heritage event, he took aim at
Donald Trump and Republicans on
immigration.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Trump and that
stuff you're hearing on the
other team, and not just -- this
isn't about Democrat/Republican.
It's about a sick message.
LISA DESJARDINS: With union
workers on Labor Day, he went
after tax breaks for the rich.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Why in God's name
should a man or woman working in
a steel mill making $50,000
a year pay at a higher rate than
someone who makes tens of
millions of dollars on Wall
Street?
LISA DESJARDINS: And at a solar
convention, it was climate.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Make no mistake
about it, folks, climate change
is caused by human endeavors,
and it's an existential threat.
What's at stake is whether we
have a future at all.
LISA DESJARDINS: The topics and
tone of a candidate, they are
from a man on pause. Biden,
who has been mourning the death
of his son Beau, told "The Late
Show"'s Stephen Colbert
he's not sure he has the heart
to run for the White House
again.
JOSEPH BIDEN: I would be lying
if I said that I knew I was
there.
LISA DESJARDINS: As Biden
carefully considers whether to
enter the race, Democratic
voters
and funders will be focused on
the debate stage here in Las
Vegas tonight and the declared
candidates, and some political
experts say Biden's window to
jump in the race may be
finite.
HILARY ROSEN, Democratic
Strategist: He doesn't have a
long time. But he's got several
weeks
more.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hilary Rosen
is a Democratic strategist.
HILARY ROSEN: There are some
filing deadlines I think coming
up next month that he has to
deal with. But we're going to
have a debate a month for the
next six months. He's got
to get in.
LISA DESJARDINS: What would it
mean if Biden gets in? Here's a
look at how those on stage
tonight did in the latest
national NBC/Wall Street Journal
poll without Biden. It's a
race between Clinton
and Sanders.
But, hypothetically, beam Biden
into the mix, and he would get
nearly one in five Democratic
votes, taking some from Sanders,
but the biggest chunk would come
from camp Clinton. At the
same time, Clinton faces
dropping favorability ratings,
meaning a debate without Biden
is
a key opportunity for her.
HILARY ROSEN: If Hillary does
really, really well and
Democrats end up rallying around
her, you know, that might take
some of the air out of the Biden
balloon. And so there's
a lot of pressure on Hillary.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Things can
change in a heartbeat.
LISA DESJARDINS: Adding to the
pressure on the race is the
super PAC Draft Biden.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Six weeks after
the election, my hole world was
altered forever.
LISA DESJARDINS: The group
created this emotional ad
stressing how Biden coped with
the death
of his wife, daughter and now
son. Biden publicly asked the
group not to run it, and they
complied.
It's part of the warm sentiment
and high favorabilities around
Biden right now, but that could
change,
warns Democratic strategist
Rodell Mollineau.
RODELL MOLLINEAU, Democratic
Strategist: Primary voters love
what they can't have. There's
always the what if. What if this
person were to run or this
person were to run? And I think
you're getting that right now
with Vice President Biden. I
think that it's a lot different,
though, once you become
a declared candidate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mollineau
points to Biden's work on the
1994 crime bill, now criticized
as propelling overincarceration.
In addition, Biden supports the
Trans-Pacific Partnership
trade deal, unpopular with many
Democrats and opposed by Clinton
and Sanders.
And, finally, with 36 years in
the Senate, Biden is an insider
in a year of the outsider.
The vice president has indicated
it all comes down to a personal
decision, but some think
tonight's debate might matter.
RODELL MOLLINEAU: Should Vice
President Biden or his
consultants see a debate where
none
of the candidates are truly
resonating with the voters or
the audience, that might be
something that factors into his
decision as to whether or not he
runs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins us
now with the latest from the
Wynn Hotel in Las Vegas,
the site of tonight's debate.
Lisa, welcome.
So, Vice President Biden is not
there. You have been talking to
a lot of people. What
are they saying about the two
front-runners and what they need
to do tonight? What is
their strategy, Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders?
LISA DESJARDINS: I
think that's right.
Most people are looking for that
matchup tonight in particular.
Let's start with Bernie Sanders.
We know from his campaign -- I
just talked to his campaign
spokeswoman, Simone Sanders,
no relation. And she says that
he will not go on the attack,
that he's always stayed
positive.
However, Judy, it's just what
that means, because they are
saying that he will give
differentiate himself from
Hillary Clinton. Expect him in
particular to talk about trade,
and that is going to come back
to that interview that you had
with Hillary Clinton in which
she announced that she opposes
the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Bernie Sanders, we expect, to
talk about his consistency,
point out that this is a
relatively
new position for Hillary
Clinton. And Hillary Clinton,
her campaign is saying they want
her to stay on message and also
stay positive, but same thing
here, Judy. Expect her to
differentiate
herself, especially
on the issue of guns.
Now, we can talk about the
debate stage, but the truth is,
Judy, the fight between these
two Democrats has already
started in Las Vegas over
unions. Here, you see Hillary
Clinton
yesterday speaking at a protest
of culinary workers. That is the
largest union in Nevada,
and it's a group that
has not endorsed yet.
They endorsed Barack Obama in
2008. Hillary Clinton certainly
wants them this time, and
she showed that yesterday. It is
a very tense fight over unions.
Expect a lot of talk about
workers tonight in the debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of course, being
a huge part of the Democratic
base, the labor unions.
Let's talk about some of the
other candidates on the stage.
We haven't heard a great deal,
Lisa, about the former governor
of Maryland, Martin O'Malley.
He's been trying to get his
voice heard. But it's been tough
in this campaign. What are we
looking for from him?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
He may be the one with the most
at stake tonight, Judy.
Martin O'Malley in some polls is
under 1 percent, just barely
above zero. And that's something
that I don't think anyone
expected a few months ago. He
has a lengthy resume. He's
personable.
He's a good campaigner, but he
just hasn't taken hold. Judy,
tonight, we expect, if anyone
goes on the attack, it will be
Martin O'Malley. He will try the
look as though he is more
of a progressive than
Hillary Clinton.
And, as I say, the stakes are
very high, Judy, so high that,
in fact, if he doesn't improve
in the polling, Judy, he may not
make future debates because of a
1 percent or higher cutoff
established by
different networks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then, Lisa,
the other two on the stage are
candidates we frankly hear
even less about. And that's the
former Senator from Virginia Jim
Webb and the former Senator
and Governor of the state of
Rhode Island Lincoln Chafee.
What are their campaigns saying
about what they need to do
tonight?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Both of them are stressing the
homespun nature of their
campaigns. Part of that is, they
are more low-funded campaigns.
They say they're proud of that.
For example, with Jim Webb,
talking to his folks, we know
that those who will be speaking
for Mr. Webb here in the
spin room are just friends of
his, who -- some of them friends
of his through the military
and his experience there, but
people who have never been in a
spin room before.
I think those two men in a way
have nothing to lose, and so we
should expect to see if
one of them has an unexpectedly
strong moment tonight. I think
one thing overall for all
of these candidates is, this
debate is especially important
because it's the first in a long
season. And if our viewers will
remember, in 2008, by this
point, there were already
13 debates.
Can you imagine? It's sort of
hard to understand, but this
being the first at this start of
the cycle, it's very important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just very
quickly, Lisa, difference
between a Republican debate and
a Democratic
debate? You have covered both of
them now. What does it look
like? What does it feel
like?
LISA DESJARDINS: It is a
vast difference, Judy.
I think, tonight, we think,
because there are fewer
candidates, and, to be honest,
because
their disagreements are a bit
more nuanced, we think we might
have a more serious policy
debate. A lot of us love those,
and hopefully we will get one
tonight. We will see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
our political director, I know
you will be there and we
will be talking to you
tomorrow all about it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Great.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to part
two of our series Congo's Hope.
Most of us take for granted the
chance to catch a movie at the
local theater. Tonight,
we bring you the story of one
man's attempt to bring cinema
back to the Democratic Republic
of Congo, a place that has
seen so much destroyed by war.
"PBS NewsHour" contributing
editor Soledad O'Brien reports.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Cinema Virunga
is just another shell of a
building on another unpaved
street
in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
PETNA NDALIKO, Filmmaker: Here
is where we used to buy our
tickets from.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Oh, this
is the ticket booth?
PETNA NDALIKO: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Oh.
PETNA NDALIKO: Yes. But
now it's the main entry.
(LAUGHTER)
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Yet filmmaker
Petna Ndaliko still sees
something special behind these
rusty gates. He remembers the
time he snuck in as a boy.
Do you remember the first time
you came to watch a film?
PETNA NDALIKO: Oh, yes, I
remember. I was still young. And
I got in illegally. I wasn't
even supposed to be in
here to watch that film.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN:
What was the movie?
PETNA NDALIKO: The film was
"Black Jim Le Magnifique." It
was a film about kung fu.
The main character was a black
guy, and it was so good for me
to see a film where a black
guy was the main character, and
it was like -- yes, he was,
like, kicking everybody.
(LAUGHTER)
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Cinema Virunga
was a rare sight, the only
modern theater for hundreds
of miles. It had opened in 1955,
when Congo was a Belgian colony,
to serve the booming
population of Goma, a city in
the shadow of a volcano that
beckoned tourists.
Inspired by Cinema Virunga,
Ndaliko became a filmmaker. Yet,
by the 1990s, Cinema Virunga
itself was no more. The Rwandan
genocide had forced a million
refugees into Goma, and the
cinema became refugee housing.
After the crisis, a series of
civil wars kept it closed.
What's lost when you
don't have cinema?
PETNA NDALIKO: Not having a
cinema, it is missing that
moment of a wow, that wow,
dream,
and start dreaming big, being
capable of imagining things from
just your room and then come up
with this crazy, beautiful idea,
and that's -- that is what
cinema brings to people.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Now Ndaliko
wants to bring that wow moment
back to the Congo.
PETNA NDALIKO: Doing well.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: It
needs a little work.
PETNA NDALIKO: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The building
briefly housed a nightclub, then
government offices, now
storage. Ndaliko has raised just
$30,000 of the $500,000 he needs
for it to become a cinema.
How much work does bringing
back the cinema require?
PETNA NDALIKO: Wiring of
installation for power, we have
to redo all of it. We have
also to isolate, so that we can
have a good sound isolation
inside here. And then all
the speakers, we have to put new
ones. We have to add all the
curtains. The roof, we
sort of have to redo
the entire roofing.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Ndaliko is not
the only one dreaming of a
cinema. He started a film school
in Goma 10 years ago,
Yole!Africa, where there are
dozens of students with a
message in search
of an audience.
MAN: I dreamed one day to become
a filmmaker to change the way of
thinking of my people.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Young
filmmakers like Yannick
Chishibanji (ph) have a new
narrative to share:
that Goma, their city,
is coming back.
MAN: When you have 20 years, 25
years, all this generation was
grown in the war. We didn't
have so much good examples.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: This new Goma
is emerging from war. The
students' films touch on modern
issues, like women in the
workplace, and reconciliation. A
cinema would bring those stories
to life.
Do you think it makes a
difference if they see a film
here, or if maybe one day there
was a big cinema where
the community could go?
MAN: If there is one cinema, I
think that, every night, we can
hope that another person
who have been changed.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: You think the
cinema is powerful enough to
change the hearts and minds of
people?
MAN: Of course.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Getting there
is half the battle. To make a
film, the school uses a
gas-fueled generator to power
cameras and computers, because
the electricity often goes
out. The Wi-Fi is
also unreliable.
So lay out for me the things
that are the daily challenges to
being a filmmaker.
MAN: If you want to go somewhere
and you want papers, because
everywhere, you would find
policeman, soldiers, it's very
hard, because we have to give
money to everybody.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Chishibanji
made a film anyway, all about
his country. It's about a man
choosing
between reconciliation and
revenge after his family is
attacked.
MAN: Sometimes, we think that it
is the other person who is our
problem.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: And, in your
film, who is the problem?
MAN: The problem is the way of
seeing things, the
communitarianism, the tribalism.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN:
Communitarianism and tribalism,
without Cinema Virunga, the only
public space
for a film about those issues
might be a street cinema with
blaring sound and blurry images.
There are places to watch films
now. There are sort of makeshift
movie houses, if you
will. Right? Why is a cinema
better than that, or different
from that?
PETNA NDALIKO: Because the
cinema take you into the film
itself. And watching on the
DVD, the quality is not the
same. And also create this space
where a family can sit and
enjoy and have their popcorn, it
is a different experience, and
then also be in a cinema and
feel safe with other people. It
is very important
psychologically for the people
around here.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN:
What do you mean?
PETNA NDALIKO: Yes, like, be in
this dark place, you are with
more than 200 people,
and then you still feel safe.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Does
that not happen in Goma?
PETNA NDALIKO: Not
often, not often.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: And is that
because of all the conflict?
PETNA NDALIKO: Because
of the conflicts.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Yole!Africa
tries to create that feeling
with an annual festival of film
and art, with deejays pumping
and music thumping, kids
spinning wildly in the air, with
a dance
contest.
Ndaliko's wife, Cherie, sees the
difference public art can make.
CHERIE RIVERS NDALIKO, Executive
Director, Yole!Africa: It
changes people's lives. It's
incredible to see people come in
having no sense of confidence,
no sense of their own
self-worth, because they have
only seen images of themselves
that portray them as worthless.
And it's incredible to see what
happens when they learn that
they can tell their own story,
and in their version of the
story, they can be the hero.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Without cinema,
the best Yole!Africa can do is
fly in a blow-up screen
from North Carolina. It deflates
if the power fails, fights to be
heard over street noise,
and Ndaliko's worry about
being out at night.
But as that familiar rectangle
of light appears, something
magical is happening too, a wow
moment, even if
just once a year.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Soledad O'Brien in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow night,
Soledad concludes our series
Congo's Hope with a story about
the gorillas in the Congo's
Virunga National Park.
Ever since Edward Snowden
released a mountain of
information about the extent of
U.S. government
secret surveillance, the battle
has been growing between tech
companies and the government
over access to data.
One of the major fronts in that
battle has been the decision by
Apple, Google, Microsoft
and others to lock down, or
encrypt, data on smartphones and
digital devices.
But new reports say the Obama
administration may be backing
down from its demands.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For months
now, the Obama administration
has said it's essential to
be able to occasionally access
messages, texts and photos that
are sent on today's smartphones.
But many of the latest devices
give individual users the power
to control their data and
block others from seeing it.
Until recently, law enforcement
has argued that this encryption
is making it increasingly
hard to track terrorists or
criminals who are using these
devices to communicate with
each other.
For example, this is what Deputy
Attorney General Sally Yates
told a Senate hearing
this summer:
SALLY YATES, U.S. Deputy
Attorney General: ISIL currently
communicates on Twitter, sending
communications to thousands of
would-be followers right here in
our country. When someone
responds
and the conversations begin,
they are then directed to
encrypted platforms for further
communication.
And even with a court order, we
can't see those communications.
This is a serious threat,
and our inability to access
these communications with valid
court orders is a real national
security problem.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This past week
the Obama administration has
apparently backed off on
some of its demands to gaining
access to our digital devices.
David Sanger has been reporting
on this for The New York Times.
And he joins me now.
David Sanger, welcome.
DAVID SANGER, The New York
Times: Thanks. Good to be with
you, William.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The term of
art here is encryption. And for
those who haven't been
following this debate very
closely, could you just give us
a quick primer? What is
encryption?
DAVID SANGER: Well, encryption
is a sophisticated version of
what you did when you made codes
when you were a kid.
It is taking the data that's in
your phone and wrapping it in a
code so that if somebody
got ahold of that phone, if they
didn't know the key, they
couldn't de-encrypt it. And
sometimes conversations are
encrypted or data is encrypted
when it's moving across a
telephone
wire as well.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, the Obama
administration, as you reported,
has recently changed its
position on this. Can you tell
me, what was it that they were
originally wanting, and
why have they changed course?
DAVID SANGER: Well, for years
now, the FBI has worried about
what they call the going
dark problem. And that is that,
as more and more information is
encrypted, they feared
that if a kidnapper had
photographs of, say, a victim,
if they were going after a
terrorist
suspect, if the special forces
landed someplace, grabbed some
iPhones from a group of
al-Qaida,
for example, that they wouldn't
be able to know what was in
those phones.
And so the director of the FBI
made a very passionate case last
year for forcing Apple,
Google, Microsoft, others to
build a back door, a way with a
court order that somebody
could get into these phones. And
Apple objected to this, along
with Google and others, saying,
if we build that back door,
someone else is going to pry it
open, and it's probably going
to be the Chinese
or the Russians.
And so that was one of many
reasons that they opposed this,
and in the end it looks like
they're winning the argument.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But if law
enforcement doesn't have that
back door, then, as you
mentioned,
it seems to make it more
difficult for them to do their
job.
DAVID SANGER: It does.
And that's why, to borrow your
iPhone here, this is a national
security problem in your
pocket, and in everybody's
pocket. So, for 99.9 percent of
communications, the government
wants you to encrypt more,
because they don't want
criminals to be able to get into
your
bank account. Your whole life
is on this phone, right?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
DAVID SANGER: Everything,
medical data, financial data,
conversations back and forth
with family
members.
And they're protected by that
four-digit code you type in,
which in turn creates a much
longer encryption key. So, the
question is, who gets to hold on
to that key? And Apple
said, we don't want it. We want
you to have your own key. Well,
the problem...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We being
the individual user.
DAVID SANGER: The individual.
So, if the FBI wanted your data,
or the NSA wanted to go in and
get it because they thought
you were communicating with a
terrorist, what Apple is saying,
don't bring that warrant
to us. Go give it to William,
and have him give you the key.
Well, of course, the FBI's
view is, drug dealers,
terrorists, they're not likely
to turn over a key.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In your
reporting, you also mentioned
that the -- that Apple CEO Tim
Cook
said to President Obama that, if
you make me build a back door
for the U.S. government
to get into, then it's very
likely that the Chinese are
going to ask the same.
I mean, is that really a concern
these companies have, that other
companies are going to say,
look, if you did it for the
Americans, you're going to do it
for us?
DAVID SANGER: Oh, it's a very
real concern. And it may happen
even without the Obama
administration
doing this.
Look, what Mr. Cook, what
Microsoft, what Google wanted
was an affirmative statement
from the U.S. government, which
they have not gotten yet, which
said, we're not going
to force these companies to
build back doors, and therefore
you shouldn't either.
Now, the back door in the United
States is based on the fact that
we have a court system
that you fundamentally trust. If
the Chinese force a back door,
then almost any user, including
an American user who goes over
and is visiting in China, might
have their data taken right
out on the basis of a court
order in China, and the
impartiality of that court, you
don't
quite trust.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Obviously,
this is all on the ongoing
fallout from the Snowden
revelations
and the tension that we have
between our needs for privacy
and the government's need for
-- to be able to be good law
enforcers and to track criminals
and terrorists.
Apart from this particular
issue, how do you see this fight
going forward from this point
on?
DAVID SANGER: Well, there is an
old saying in Washington that
nothing's ever over, right?
So, right now, all you have is a
set of decisions that the Obama
administration has made, not
to press this issue, not to go
for legislation. We have a
presidential election coming up.
Who knows if the next president
will see it the same way, which
is why privacy advocates
wants there to be a law in
Congress that says the
government shall not get a back
door,
and why law enforcement
wants to go fight that.
I think what you have seen
happen here is a truce for the
next 15 or 16 months until
a new president comes in. But
this issue is going to come
back, because that tension that
you describe between privacy and
security is one where it's
always a pendulum back and
forth. And after a new terror
attack, some large incident
where somebody couldn't get
the data, you could imagine the
FBI, the NSA, others coming back
and saying, see, we really
do need this data.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: David Sanger
of The New York Times, thank you
so much.
DAVID SANGER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now fears of a
third intifada in the Middle
East.
A recent surge in attacks have
left at least eight Israelis and
28 Palestinians dead, including
many of the attackers
themselves. After another deadly
day, many are thinking the worst
is
yet to come.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Martin Seemungal reports from
Jerusalem.
And a warning: Some
images may be disturbing.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Palestinians
proclaimed it a day of rage, and
a new string of attacks
attested to the fury that's
fueled nearly a month of
stabbings and shootings.
Today, a pair of Palestinian men
shot and stabbed passengers
aboard this bus in Jerusalem.
Police said two Israelis were
killed, along with one of the
attackers.
MICKY ROSENFELD, Israeli Police
Spokesman: Two terrorists
carried out an attack. One
of them had a pistol. The second
one had a knife. The terrorists
were shot. One of them
was shot and killed. The second
one was shot and captured at the
scene.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Within
minutes, another assailant
rammed his car into a crowded
bus
stop in an ultra-orthodox Jewish
neighborhood in downtown
Jerusalem. Then, he leapt out
and hacked at bystanders with a
cleaver, killing an Israeli man,
before he was shot dead.
Meanwhile, north of Tel Aviv,
two more stabbing attacks
wounded five Israelis in
Ra'anana.
Several were in serious
condition. Trouble also broke
out across the West Bank, where
hundreds of Palestinian youths
confronted Israeli troops.
Soldiers used tear gas and
rubber bullets, but, in
Bethlehem, the army said it shot
and killed a Palestinian before
he could toss a gasoline bomb.
In turn, Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu convened an
emergency security cabinet
meeting,
and condemned Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister (through
translator): I am calling on the
head of the Palestinian
Authority, Abu Mazen, to stop
lying. Stop the incitement. A
real
leader must show responsibility.
You must stop the incitement
coming from the Palestinian
Authority.
NABIL SHAATH, Former Palestinian
Foreign Minister: Time is
running out, and running out
fast.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Nabil Shaath
is a senior member of the ruling
Fatah Party in the West
Bank and an adviser to Abbas,
also known as Abu Mazen.
NABIL SHAATH: I know Abu Mazen
and all the leadership is
extremely alarmed and afraid
of this going out of hand.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The upsurge in
clashes between young
Palestinians and Israeli
soldiers has
opened a heated debate: Is this
a so called third intifada? And
that's what Shaath is
calling it.
NABIL SHAATH: This intifada is
totally unorganized, unplanned
for. It is the natural and
spontaneous
reaction of people who cannot
take Israeli despotism anymore.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The
demonstrations near the Israeli
checkpoints in Ramallah happen
almost daily now.
Twenty-one-year-old Mahmoud
Ayala attends most of them.
"I am ready to sacrifice my
soul, my blood for Palestine,"
he says. "I want to be free."
Palestinians in the West Bank,
in Gaza, are following events in
Jerusalem. In a violent
assault on a 13-year-old Jewish
boy yesterday, the alleged
attacker was also 13. According
to police, he was hit by
a car as he ran away.
A video surfaced showing the
young teen on the ground, broken
and bleeding. He was allegedly
denied medical assistance.
People can be heard on the video
shouting obscenities at him.
That video was widely seen on
social media. It had a profound
impact here on the streets
of East Jerusalem, adding to the
frustration and anger, creating
even more tension between
Palestinians and Israelis.
This Palestinian told us he was
afraid these invitations might
be mistaken for a knife
in his pocket.
MAN: I am afraid to see the
soldier see like a knife,
really, to shoot me.
MAN: I'm worried. Yes, of course
I'm worried for both of the
peoples.
So, if I were to go to market,
like we say, or go to any
places, I'm afraid for some
people
to shout, this is Arabic people,
and some security or government
that didn't understand
what the situation will be, they
are afraid, they shoot the
people without nothing.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: You're afraid
they would shoot you for no
reason?
MAN: No reason.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Just
because you're Palestinian.
MAN: Yes, just because
I'm Palestinian.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the Temple Mount in
the Old City are at the heart
of what is happening. Al-Aqsa is
the third holiest site in Islam.
The Temple Mount is
the holiest site in Judaism.
David Horovitz says that, when
Israel captured the Old City in
1967, it didn't want to provoke
a war with Islam. Jews are not
allowed to pray on the Temple
Mount. But certain right-wing
Israeli leaders have been
pushing recently to change the
so-called status quo.
DAVID HOROVITZ, The Times of
Israel: The notion that Israel
might be changing the
arrangements
there, which Israel says it is
not going to do, has been
utilized by people who want to
stir up trouble. And we are
now seeing the trouble.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Netanyahu
accuses Palestinian and Israeli
Arab leaders of stoking the
violence
with rumors that Jews are trying
to take over Al-Aqsa. He's also
stopped Jewish political
visitors from visiting the site.
President Abbas has disavowed
the violence, but has also
called for Al-Aqsa to be
defended
from Israel. Jewish nationalists
rallying today in the heart of
West Jerusalem, a counterpoint
to the fear, they call it a
display of defiance against
terror.
DANIEL LURIA, Israel: There are
definitely some people who are
thinking twice about where
they're going. Most people will
be looking around over their
shoulder. We have to be
more aware. It's not just a lone
incident. We have got a lot of
enemies even amongst
us.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: And then,
suddenly, a Palestinian appears
with an act of defiance of his
own.
MAN: There is nothing here.
There's never been a Palestinian
country here. There's never
been a Palestinian country here.
(CROSSTALK)
MAN: Thank you very much.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: It was a
heated debate, but it ended
peacefully.
Benjamin Netanyahu is vowing to
take aggressive action, calling
up more soldiers, threatening
to set up checkpoints in East
Jerusalem. But there is great
concern tonight that this recent
cycle of violence is beyond the
control of leaders on both sides
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Martin Seemungal
reporting for us from Jerusalem.
Late this evening, U.S.
Secretary of State John Kerry
said he will travel to the
region
soon to help ease tensions.
Finally tonight: the latest
addition to the "NewsHour"
bookshelf.
It's a look back at one of the
more turbulent political eras in
our country's modern history.
I sat down last week with a key
chronicler of the times and a
principal player.
We thought we knew him. His
political career, with its high,
lows and reinventions, have
been scrutinized in hundreds of
books. Now a whole new Richard
M. Nixon emerges from
Bob Woodward's new book, "The
Last of the President's Men."
And Bob joins me now, along with
Alexander Butterfield, the man
he calls the ultimate
insider in the
Nixon White House.
Welcome to both of you.
So, Bob Woodward, we really did
think and you say you thought we
knew everything there
was to know about Richard Nixon,
but after talking to the man
sitting next to you, you
learned differently.
BOB WOODWARD, Author, "The Last
of the President's Men": For 46
hours and thousands of documents
that Alex took out of the White
House, and I went to his place
in California and started
looking at this.
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD, Former
Nixon White House Aide: Every
memo that I wrote in the
month of January.
BOB WOODWARD: Quite frankly, I
was shocked, particularly about
some of the memos about
Vietnam and the lies and
the contradictions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You kept this
quiet for decades, four decades.
Why finally talk?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: I was
lured into talking by my friend
here.
Now, we -- Bob is the one who
approached me. I knew he was
interested in where I had been
in the White House, but that was
a relatively unknown part of the
Nixon inner sanctum, which
I actually was. And the more we
talked, I guess the more he got
interested. And I knew
that a lot of it was history in
a way. A lot of it is history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have
insights into Richard Nixon that
no one else has shared.
You were the top aide to the man
closest to Richard Nixon in the
White House, Bob Haldeman.
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: Yes, I
was Haldeman's deputy. Haldeman
knew far more than I knew.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you bring a
side -- we already knew this was
man of many layers,
many complications, Bob. But
what we see here is someone who
was, for one thing, very
socially
awkward. I mean, the first
meeting that Mr. Butterfield had
with the president was
extraordinary.
BOB WOODWARD: And Nixon couldn't
speak in that first meeting. And
Haldeman told Alex,
said, look, he hasn't met you
yet. He doesn't like new people.
You have to hide.
And in the first month or two in
the White House, you were
sneaking around and hiding
behind walls and pillars.
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD:
For almost a month, yes.
One of the first days, he said,
it will take a while. I have to
wait for just the right
time, because he's a funny guy,
and new people spook him, new
faces. And I thought, now you
tell me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there's so
much about his interactions with
other people. There was
a state dinner where he said, I
only -- there are only five
people on this list of 180 I
want to have any kind
of conversation with.
Bob, you mentioned Vietnam. I
mean, that was a moment, I
think, that will resonate more
than any other, probably.
BOB WOODWARD: And there's this
handwritten memo that was in
Alex's 20 boxes from Nixon
to Kissinger on a top-secret
memo saying, we have had 10
years of air operations in
Vietnam. What's the result?
Zilch. Nothing. It's been a
failure.
Now, just the night before,
Nixon had told CBS News that it
was very, very effective.
And you go into this, and you
connect it with the dots of the
tapes and other documents,
and you see what was driving
Nixon with the bombing wasn't to
win the war, but the bombing
was popular, according to the
polls, and so Nixon intensified
more bombing because it
won the election. And Kissinger
actually tells Nixon, that's
when you won the election.
And you read this, and it's
shocking and chilling, when you
see the deceit here for the
purpose
of winning reelection. It's
the other side of Watergate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alex Butterfield,
what -- what -- how did you deal
with that? What were you
telling yourself when these
things were happening?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: I was an
integral part of the staff. I
didn't -- I wasn't too shocked
by the things I saw.
I wasn't naive, although it was
a totally different environment
than in the military.
A lot of it was very petty. We
had big meetings about the
president's image and that sort
of thing. But things I had
to do, I just -- I did.
BOB WOODWARD: You said some of
it was a cesspool, that there
was this obsession with these
deceptions.
(CROSSTALK)
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: Yes.
You're sort of exploiting
everybody. How will it play in
Peoria? We sort of said that.
Or another thing I heard all the
time, we can always say that it
was national security.
We can always say -- and the
intimation is that we're always
covering up. There was a
lot of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also say
there were some good things
about the Nixon presidency.
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: Oh, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The country
didn't completely suffer as a
result of his presidency.
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: Oh,
absolutely not. And, also, he
wasn't a bad guy. I came to
like him very, very much, partly
because I understood these
vulnerabilities, the fact
that he was so awkward. Even
there were times when I pitied
him.
It seems odd to pity the
president, but I truly pitied
him because of this awkwardness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does
that surprise you, Bob?
BOB WOODWARD: No, but this is
the kind of last piece of the
Nixon puzzle.
And you wondered -- all of the
people who were in the White
House had affiliations with
Nixon. Alex didn't. He was an
outsider. He became this
ultimate insider. And then he
left with all of these
documents, at a time when
documents were being destroyed,
when
there was that sense
of the unraveling.
And I -- some of the stories
Alex told me, I just didn't
quite believe, frankly, until
I saw the documents. And there
it was, things that you didn't
think possible, even in the
Nixon White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You are best
known for revealing the taping
system inside the White House.
Why did you do that?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: I
certainly didn't want to do it.
Just three or four people knew.
And we kept that secret
for over two years.
But, when I was called before
the committee, I decided I would
answer only the most direct
question relative to the tapes.
The most direct question. And,
suddenly, that question came.
FRED THOMPSON, Minority Counsel:
Mr. Butterfield, are you aware
of the installation of any
listening
devices in the Oval
Office of the president?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: I was
aware of listening devices, yes,
sir.
FRED THOMPSON: Are you aware of
any devices that were installed
in the Executive Office
Building office
of the president?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD:
Yes, sir, at that time.
FRED THOMPSON: Were they
installed at the same time?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: They were
installed at the same time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Have we now
answered all the questions about
Richard Nixon and his
presidency?
BOB WOODWARD: I think one of the
lessons here is, history is
never over, and you never get
the full story.
And particularly now in 2016,
next year, when we're going to
elect another president, and
there are all these people
running we don't know much
about, and we need to know. And
I think it's going to be our job
in the media to really dig in
and explain, so there's not
a surprise.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What questions
should we be asking, based on
your experience in the White
House? What do we need to know
about the people who want to be
president?
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD: Well,
obviously, we didn't know enough
about Richard Nixon.
But, frankly, Judy, I'm not sure
that the American electorate is
going to do much more.
I think Bob feels differently.
But would we have elected
Richard Nixon had we known about
these -- odd behavior? He did a
great many good things,
domestically, as well as in
foreign
affairs.
BOB WOODWARD: But it wasn't
just odd. It was illegal.
And it -- particularly in
Vietnam, the idea that the
president is going to conduct a
war
and drop three million tons of
bombs in Southeast Asia, and
know and write secretly that
it's
achieving zilch and a failure,
and, you know, I think people
are going to say, hey, wait
a minute. We can't have
a president like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is an
extraordinary book, an
extraordinary story.
Bob Woodward, Alex Butterfield,
we thank you very much, "The
Last of the President's Men."
ALEXANDER BUTTERFIELD:
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank
you very much.
On the "NewsHour" online: It's
the perfect example of a
cross-cultural exchange. More
than 60 graphic artists from
Seattle, Havana and Tehran
participated in a traveling
exhibit
where politics and prejudices
were checked at the door. You
can see some of their designs
and hear from the show's
curators. We have a video from
Seattle PBS station KCTS on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight for
the finale of "Frontline"'s
three-part documentary "My
Brother's
Bomber" that investigates the
Lockerbie, Scotland, bomber
mystery.
And on "Charlie Rose" tonight:
actress Juliette Binoche on her
role in "The 33," the story
of the Chilean mine rescue that
ended five years ago this week.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, we recap the
highlights from the first
Democratic presidential debate.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.